---
layout: post
title: "Project Reupload #1: Wisp"
categories: project
tags: game gamedev unity
---

> I'm writing posts on my old projects. In this post, I talk about a game I made with Henry G. for Ludum Dare 40. I also talk about my old game dev experiences.

<!--more-->

## Before The Actual Project I Will Tell You About My Previous Life As an Aspiring Game Dev, Deal With It

Prior to discovering AI, I guess I could say game dev was my first choice of career. I made my first game back in high school with GameMaker. In college I ran through enough Unity tutorials to make an (unpublished) Android puzzle game. I vaguely recall some back-and-forth with Zynga about a summer internship, but withdrew my application.

I decided to start a new project with a larger scope. Down the line I met Henry at gamedev club and even convinced him to help me out somehow. Unfortunately we weren't making much meaningful progress because I kept adding features and underestimating the ballooning scope of the project. I had started with a basic multiplayer pirate-themed game with attack-defense gameplay like Clash of Clans – a big task already! Then I thought, why not add a two-phased battle? How about custom attacks for each troop with MOBA-style cooldowns? Maybe clans? (Why was I such a Supercell fanboy?)

![pirates]
*Flat Boats at Dusk, 2017. Acrylic on canvas.*

I also got stuck on details. I wanted deployed troops to avoid colliding, and I came across a paper about [reciprocal velocity obstacles](https://gamma.cs.unc.edu/RVO/icra2008.pdf) (the first research paper I ever read of my own volition, to my knowledge). I decided to code it in C# right in Unity, even though Henry later found a library which implemented it efficiently. We didn't even need such strict collision avoidance; a proximity-based repelling force would have sufficed.

It wasn't getting anywhere, and in fact it never did get anywhere. In light of all this, Henry eventually suggested we try doing Ludum Dare, a competition to build a game from scratch over a single weekend. I can't speak for him, but I at least saw the opportunity to walk away with a finished game.

## Ludum Dare 40

Every Ludum Dare has a theme, and for 2017 it was: **The more you have, the worse it is**. After some brainstorming, we decided on a [rogue-like](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Roguelike) game. Rogue-likes are a specific subgenre of role-playing games, and a key commonality is procedurally generated dungeons, yet another feature I secretly wanted to add to my pirate game.

It was sort of an interesting problem. We had parameters for room count, room size, and hall size. We built the rooms randomly, then connected them with a minimum spanning tree, and added a few extra halls based on another connectivity parameter. We used Unity Tilemap to implement the actual grid.

None of that was relevant to the theme of course. We stuffed the entire theme into a lighting buddy orbiting the player, called a wisp. The player could make the wisp brighter to see more of the dungeon, but the monsters would become more aggressive. It was pretty hard – I don't even think we gave the player a weapon. We scattered healing potions around the map, but they gave some light too, making the monsters more aggressive in the vicinity.

![wisp1]
*Some in-game screenshots*

We didn't win anything, but I think some guy on YouTube played a bunch of submissions and said some slightly positive things about ours. I wish I could find it!

## Takeaways

It struck me late in the weekend that I went in with the explicit purpose of *finishing* a game, yet I still found a way to muddle around with a completely unnecessary feature. Ludum Dare taught me to value the MVP over whatever new idea or silly intellectual problem catches my fancy, something I hadn't figured out in over a year of game dev on the side.

I stopped working on any games after that. The semester of Ludum Dare 40, I took a Machine Learning class, which kickstarted my interest in AI. My game dev phase was far from a waste though. I didn't use C# again, but experience with an extra language is never bad. I used Unity for several future projects, and the interface alone carries over to tons of different programs. And though it's a bit difficult to articulate, there is a way of thinking like a game designer that I'll always carry with me.

[pirates]: /assets/images/pirates.png
[rvo]: /assets/images/rvo.png
[wisp1]: /assets/images/wisp1.png